a few years ago I had this big
epiphany how do we shift from
just something we're building
together to all of these ways
that we could be exploring
together we're building the
largest ocean observation
network in the world and we're
doing it with other people and
powered by citizens and start my
story for years ago I met this
amazing person named Eric
Stackpole he told me this
wonderful story about this
underwater cave that was filled
with gold supposedly and he told
this whole story of treasure
hunters we tried to find it and
then he showed me this little
underwater robot that he was
trying to build to explore it's
called an ROV a remotely
operated vehicle and how it
works is it goes down underneath
the surface it's got a camera
send live video of a thin tether
to the operator on the surface
you can see what it's saying and
drive it
I was captivated by Eric story
we didn't have any money to buy
one of these RVs ourselves and
unfortunately we also didn't
know how to build one ourselves
we had an early prototype but it
didn't work so we did what
anybody would do in our position
we asked the internet for help
we created a website called open
RV calm and we started asking
people to critique our designs
and help us improve it
at first it was just me and eric
asking questions to each other
about Plan C and and basic
engineering and slowly people
began to add feedback and give
us advice I think they just took
pity on us but eventually we got
to the point where the robot was
good enough to take to the cave
so we got our friends together
we mounted a little expedition
and we sent the robot into the
back of the cave and went down
we found millions of dollars of
cold
actually we didn't
we didn't find anything but we
learned a lot and that was the
important thing and one of the
important things we learned was
that this low-cost underwater
robot kit was something that
other people wanted and so we
decided to put it on kickstarter
and we raised a hundred thousand
dollars
this was back in $MONTH 2012
when that was a lot of money on
kickstarter and it was certainly
more than we expected and it
caused us to really quickly
outgrow our garage operation i
remember the day when the boxes
showed up and I was thinking oh
my gosh
but we got them together and we
got him shipped out and over the
past three years we've shipped
thousands of these things to
every corner of the globe
they've gone to the bottom of
the earth in Antarctica they've
gone to the top of the earth i
got this photo last week from
explorer who is studying glacial
lakes in the Himalayas he's our
schools in oakland our
communities in Papua New Guinea
we have people who are
discovering glass bunch reefs in
British Columbia we have people
who are creating 3d
visualizations of habitat for
curbing monk seals in the
community just continues to
surprise us
this was from last week we were
up at Lake Tahoe we found a
shipwreck a hundred and twenty
meters and we're streaming it
all live to facebook and Ustream
and twitch TV was pretty
exciting moment for us last week
our latest design is the Trident
so we took all the things that
we've learned over the past
three years and we put that into
a new design for underwater
robots that we think is a
revolutionary step forward for
low-cost underwater drones this
thing is fast
it flies like a fighter jet but
it's also super maneuverable and
still cost less than fifteen
hundred dollars so other people
wanted this too and so we raised
810,000 for this on Kickstarter
last October and we're preparing
to ship it in the fall of this
year so we're really excited
about that i think this is
pretty amazing
in just a few years two guys in
a garage but turned into a
global community of ocean
explorers we're building the
largest ocean observation
network in the world and we're
doing it with other people
it's powered by citizens this is
laura james she was one of the
first people to notice that see
stars were dying around the
Puget Sound and she notified
scientists and they confirmed
that was part of this widespread
die off
it was going on around the
Pacific coast called sea star
wasting syndrome they didn't
know what's causing it and Laura
was not content with that answer
so she started a citizen science
project to get people to notice
and contribute data that data
was then part of the Pyrenees
work at UC Santa Cruz and they
did this amazing PBS story about
Laura and her citizen science
project and all the people that
are contributing and a
congressman saw that and decided
to introduce the emergency
marine disease act and so
there's this bill in Congress
right now you can call and help
push it along but i love this
story because this is it you
know this isn't just a headline
that see stars are dying this is
people who are getting involved
is Congress people who are
taking notice and action is
happening
Lauren her team are still out
there now they're monitoring
stormwater runoff to see if
that's the problem they're
looking at merchants to see if
the virus is spreading its the
scientific method actually
becomes the message there's this
whole architecture for
participation
that's a big deal so I don't
want to go into the details of
what's going on in Flint it's an
ongoing disaster and all of you
know about it but i do want to
point out that that too was a
citizen science project
professor Mark Edwards at
Virginia Tech was sick of the
institutional failure so he gave
out 300 kids to the communities
that you guys need to start
testing your water and take
action and the Dead was a
fantastic piece and wired my
favorite paragraph was towards
the end said this kind of
citizen power apocalypse
averting science is spreading he
went to list a whole host of
citizen science projects were
doing similar work at the end of
that paragraph i love this line
i'm going to read it
researchers are learning that
there's a difference between
publishing results and actually
you know getting
and so that's where we are
that's what's going on the tools
are getting really good really
fast all of the microcontrollers
and sensors and cameras and GPS
are now building blocks that
makers can use and all of these
maker spaces are popping up all
over the world and classrooms
and museums and libraries and
just in neighborhoods its
profound and people have access
to powerful digital fabrication
tools like laser cutters and 3d
printers it would be impossible
for Eric to do what we did just
five years ago we were really at
the very beginning of this this
is our same garage this is a our
roommates at the time and they
had this idea to create low-cost
satellites using the same
components and so they prototype
the satellite in the garage and
they've since started a company
raised hundreds of millions of
dollars and launched a
constellation of hundreds of
satellites they're not getting
an image of every location on
Earth every day it's a big
company and they're doing
important work
this is an illegal gold mining
operation in Peru that they find
encroaching on this river it's
really extraordinary I mean this
used to be the stuff of nation
states and now it's our
roommates starting this new
garage
it's extraordinary this is not
just a silicon valley store
either these are DIY drones
being used in Indonesia for
conservation 50 cent microscopes
tens of thousands of people are
exploring the micro cosmos
creating DIY Geiger counters to
monitor the radiation after
Fukushima there's all sorts of
low-cost DIY bio equipment
they're being used to power
garage labs and community bio
labs across the world
the list goes on and on we need
everyone to see themselves as
explorers we need everybody to
recognize that they have the
agency to be curious to ask
questions because I promise you
when you give people the tools
to ask questions they will
surprise you with what they ask
and with what they discover
thank you
we're in the northern part of
the Red Sea and the reason we're
here is we're trying to test out
our swishy robot fingers for the
for the first time in a real